README.md, before:

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-dev-blue.svg)](https://evetion.github.io/GeoArrays.jl/dev) [![](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-stable-blue.svg)](https://evetion.github.io/GeoArrays.jl/stable) [![CI](https://github.com/evetion/GeoArrays.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/evetion/GeoArrays.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml) [![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/evetion/GeoArrays.jl/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/evetion/GeoArrays.jl)

# GeoArrays

Simple geographical raster interaction built on top of [ArchGDAL](https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDAL.jl/), [GDAL](https://github.com/JuliaGeo/GDAL.jl) and [CoordinateTransformations](https://github.com/FugroRoames/CoordinateTransformations.jl).

A GeoArray is an AbstractArray, an AffineMap for calculating coordinates based on the axes and a CRS definition to interpret these coordinates into in the real world. It's three dimensional and can be seen as a stack (3D) of 2D geospatial rasters (bands), the dimensions are :x, :y, and :bands. The AffineMap and CRS (coordinates) only operate on the :x and :y dimensions.

This packages takes its inspiration from Python's [rasterio](https://github.com/mapbox/rasterio).

## Installation

```julia
(v1.7) pkg> add GeoArrays
```

## Examples

### Basic Usage

Load the `GeoArrays` package.

```julia
julia> using GeoArrays
```

Read a GeoTIFF file and display its information, i.e. AffineMap and projection (CRS).

```julia
# Read TIF file
julia> fn = download("https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDALDatasets/blob/master/data/utmsmall.tif?raw=true")
julia> geoarray = GeoArrays.read(fn)
100x100x1 Array{UInt8,3} with AffineMap([60.0 0.0; 0.0 -60.0], [440720.0, 3.75132e6]) and CRS PROJCS["NAD27 / UTM zone 11N"...

# Affinemap containing offset and scaling
julia> geoarray.f
AffineMap([60.0 0.0; 0.0 -60.0], [440720.0, 3.75132e6])

# WKT projection string
julia> geoarray.crs
GeoFormatTypes.WellKnownText{GeoFormatTypes.CRS}(GeoFormatTypes.CRS(), "PROJCS[\"NAD27 / UTM zone 11N\",GEOGCS[\"NAD27\",DATUM[\"North_American_Datum_1927\",SPHEROID[\"Clarke 1866\",6378206.4,294.978698213898,AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"7008\"]],AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"6267\"]],PRIMEM[\"Greenwich\",0],UNIT[\"degree\",0.0174532925199433,AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"9122\"]],AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"4267\"]],PROJECTION[\"Transverse_Mercator\"],PARAMETER[\"latitude_of_origin\",0],PARAMETER[\"central_meridian\",-117],PARAMETER[\"scale_factor\",0.9996],PARAMETER[\"false_easting\",500000],PARAMETER[\"false_northing\",0],UNIT[\"metre\",1,AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"9001\"]],AXIS[\"Easting\",EAST],AXIS[\"Northing\",NORTH],AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"26711\"]]")
```

### Writing to GeoTIFF

Create a random `GeoArray` and write it to a GeoTIFF file.

```julia
# Create, reference and write a TIFF
julia> ga = GeoArray(rand(100,200))
julia> bbox!(ga, (min_x=2., min_y=51., max_x=5., max_y=54.))  # roughly the Netherlands
julia> epsg!(ga, 4326)  # in WGS84
julia> GeoArrays.write("test.tif", ga)
```

### Streaming support

The package supports streaming reading.

```julia
# Read in 39774x60559x1 raster (AHN3), but without masking (missing) support
julia> @time ga = GeoArrays.read(fn, masked=false)
  0.001917 seconds (46 allocations: 2.938 KiB)
39774x60559x1 ArchGDAL.RasterDataset{Float32,ArchGDAL.IDataset} with AffineMap([1.0433425614165472e-6 0.0; 0.0 -1.0433425614165472e-6], [0.8932098305563291, 0.11903776654646055]) and CRS PROJCS["Amersfoort / RD New",GEOGCS["Amersfoort",DATUM["Amersfoort",SPHEROID["Bessel 1841",6377397.155,299.1528128,AUTHORITY["EPSG","7004"]],AUTHORITY["EPSG","6289"]],PRIMEM["Greenwich",0,AUTHORITY["EPSG","8901"]],UNIT["degree",0.0174532925199433,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9122"]],AUTHORITY["EPSG","4289"]],PROJECTION["Oblique_Stereographic"],PARAMETER["latitude_of_origin",52.1561605555556],PARAMETER["central_meridian",5.38763888888889],PARAMETER["scale_factor",0.9999079],PARAMETER["false_easting",155000],PARAMETER["false_northing",463000],UNIT["metre",1,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9001"]],AXIS["Easting",EAST],AXIS["Northing",NORTH],AUTHORITY["EPSG","28992"]]
```

### Reading bands

GeoTIFFs can be large, with several bands, one can read.

When working with large rasters, e.g. with satellite images that can be GB in size, it is useful to be able to read only one band (or a selection of them) to `GeoArray`. When using `read`, one can specify the band.

```julia
# Get file
julia> fn = download("https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDALDatasets/blob/master/pyrasterio/RGB.byte.tif?raw=true")

# Read band 2
julia> ga_band = GeoArrays.read(fn, masked=false, band=2)
791x718x1 Array{UInt8, 3} with AffineMap([300.0379266750948 0.0; 0.0 -300.041782729805], [101985.0, 2.826915e6]) and CRS PROJCS["UTM Zone 18, Northern Hemisphere",GEOGCS["Unknown datum based upon the WGS 84 ellipsoid",DATUM["Not_specified_based_on_WGS_84_spheroid",SPHEROID["WGS 84",6378137,298.257223563,AUTHORITY["EPSG","7030"]]],PRIMEM["Greenwich",0],UNIT["degree",0.0174532925199433,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9122"]]],PROJECTION["Transverse_Mercator"],PARAMETER["latitude_of_origin",0],PARAMETER["central_meridian",-75],PARAMETER["scale_factor",0.9996],PARAMETER["false_easting",500000],PARAMETER["false_northing",0],UNIT["metre",1,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9001"]],AXIS["Easting",EAST],AXIS["Northing",NORTH]]
```

### Using coordinates

`GeoArray` has geographical coordinates for all array elements (pixels). They can be retrieved with the `GeoArrays.coords` function.

```julia
# Find coordinates by index
julia> GeoArrays.coords(geoarray, [1,1])
2-element StaticArrays.SArray{Tuple{2},Float64,1,2}:
 440720.0
      3.75132e6
```

All coordinates (tuples) are obtained when omitting the index parameter.

```julia
# Find all coordinates
julia> GeoArrays.coords(geoarray)
101×101 Array{StaticArrays.SArray{Tuple{2},Float64,1,2},2}:
 [440720.0, 3.75132e6]  [440720.0, 3.75126e6]  [440720.0, 3.7512e6] ...
 ...
```

The operation can be reversed, i.e. row and column index can be computed from coordinates with the `indices` function.

```julia
# Find index by coordinates
julia> indices(geoarray, [440720.0, 3.75132e6])
2-element StaticArrays.SArray{Tuple{2},Int64,1,2}:
 1
 1
```
### Manipulation

Basic `GeoArray` manipulation is implemented, e.g. translation.
```julia
# Translate complete raster by x + 100
julia> trans = Translation(100, 0)
julia> compose!(ga, trans)
```

When GeoArrays have the same dimensions, AffineMap and CRS, addition, subtraction, multiplication and division can be used.

```julia
# Math with GeoArrays (- + * /)
julia> GeoArray(rand(5,5,1)) - GeoArray(rand(5,5,1))
5x5x1 Array{Float64,3} with AffineMap([1.0 0.0; 0.0 1.0], [0.0, 0.0]) and undefined CRS
```

### Interpolation

GeoArrays can be interpolated with the `interpolate` function.

```julia
julia> using GeoEstimation  # or any esimation solver from the GeoStats ecosystem
julia> ga = GeoArray(Array{Union{Missing, Float64}}(rand(5, 1)))
julia> ga.A[2,1] = missing
[:, :, 1] =
 0.6760718768442127
  missing
 0.852882193026649
 0.7137410453351622
 0.5949409082233854
julia> GeoArrays.interpolate!(ga, IDW(:band => (neighbors=3,)))  # band is the hardcoded variable
[:, :, 1] =
 0.6760718768442127
 0.7543298370153771
 0.852882193026649
 0.7137410453351622
 0.5949409082233854
```

### Plotting

Individual bands from a GeoArray can be plotted with the `plot` function. By default the first band is used.

```julia
# Plot a GeoArray
julia> using Plots
julia> fn = download("https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDALDatasets/blob/master/pyrasterio/RGB.byte.tif?raw=true")
julia> ga = GeoArrays.read(fn)
julia> plot(ga)

# or plot a band other than the first one
julia> plot(ga, band=2)
```

![example plot](docs/img/RGB.byte.png)

### Subsetting arrays

GeoArrays can be subset by row, column and band using the array subsetting notation, e.g. `ga[100:200, 200:300, 1:2]`.

```julia
# Get file
julia> fn = download("https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDALDatasets/blob/master/pyrasterio/RGB.byte.tif?raw=true")

# Read the entire file
julia> ga = GeoArrays.read(fn);

julia> ga.f
AffineMap([300.0379266750948 0.0; 0.0 -300.041782729805], [101985.0, 2.826915e6])

julia> ga_sub = ga[200:500,200:400,begin:end]
301x201x3 Array{Union{Missing, UInt8}, 3} with AffineMap([300.0379266750948 0.0; 0.0 -300.041782729805], [161692.54740834387, 2.767206685236769e6]) and CRS PROJCS["UTM Zone 18, Northern Hemisphere",GEOGCS["Unknown datum based upon the WGS 84 ellipsoid",DATUM["Not_specified_based_on_WGS_84_spheroid",SPHEROID["WGS 84",6378137,298.257223563,AUTHORITY["EPSG","7030"]]],PRIMEM["Greenwich",0],UNIT["degree",0.0174532925199433,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9122"]]],PROJECTION["Transverse_Mercator"],PARAMETER["latitude_of_origin",0],PARAMETER["central_meridian",-75],PARAMETER["scale_factor",0.9996],PARAMETER["false_easting",500000],PARAMETER["false_northing",0],UNIT["metre",1,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9001"]],AXIS["Easting",EAST],AXIS["Northing",NORTH]]

julia> ga_sub.f
AffineMap([300.0379266750948 0.0; 0.0 -300.041782729805], [161692.54740834387, 2.767206685236769e6])

julia> plot(ga_sub)
```
![example plot](docs/img/RGB.byte.subset.png)

Commit message:

Document profile, fill! and fix exports.

README.md, after:

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-dev-blue.svg)](https://evetion.github.io/GeoArrays.jl/dev) [![](https://img.shields.io/badge/docs-stable-blue.svg)](https://evetion.github.io/GeoArrays.jl/stable) [![CI](https://github.com/evetion/GeoArrays.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/evetion/GeoArrays.jl/actions/workflows/CI.yml) [![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/evetion/GeoArrays.jl/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/evetion/GeoArrays.jl)

# GeoArrays

Simple geographical raster interaction built on top of [ArchGDAL](https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDAL.jl/), [GDAL](https://github.com/JuliaGeo/GDAL.jl) and [CoordinateTransformations](https://github.com/FugroRoames/CoordinateTransformations.jl).

A GeoArray is an AbstractArray, an AffineMap for calculating coordinates based on the axes and a CRS definition to interpret these coordinates into in the real world. It's three dimensional and can be seen as a stack (3D) of 2D geospatial rasters (bands), the dimensions are :x, :y, and :bands. The AffineMap and CRS (coordinates) only operate on the :x and :y dimensions.

This packages takes its inspiration from Python's [rasterio](https://github.com/mapbox/rasterio).

## Installation

```julia
(v1.7) pkg> add GeoArrays
```

## Examples

### Basic Usage

Load the `GeoArrays` package.

```julia
julia> using GeoArrays
```

Read a GeoTIFF file and display its information, i.e. AffineMap and projection (CRS).

```julia
# Read TIF file
julia> fn = download("https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDALDatasets/blob/master/data/utmsmall.tif?raw=true")
julia> geoarray = GeoArrays.read(fn)
100x100x1 Array{UInt8,3} with AffineMap([60.0 0.0; 0.0 -60.0], [440720.0, 3.75132e6]) and CRS PROJCS["NAD27 / UTM zone 11N"...

# Affinemap containing offset and scaling
julia> geoarray.f
AffineMap([60.0 0.0; 0.0 -60.0], [440720.0, 3.75132e6])

# WKT projection string
julia> geoarray.crs
GeoFormatTypes.WellKnownText{GeoFormatTypes.CRS}(GeoFormatTypes.CRS(), "PROJCS[\"NAD27 / UTM zone 11N\",GEOGCS[\"NAD27\",DATUM[\"North_American_Datum_1927\",SPHEROID[\"Clarke 1866\",6378206.4,294.978698213898,AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"7008\"]],AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"6267\"]],PRIMEM[\"Greenwich\",0],UNIT[\"degree\",0.0174532925199433,AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"9122\"]],AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"4267\"]],PROJECTION[\"Transverse_Mercator\"],PARAMETER[\"latitude_of_origin\",0],PARAMETER[\"central_meridian\",-117],PARAMETER[\"scale_factor\",0.9996],PARAMETER[\"false_easting\",500000],PARAMETER[\"false_northing\",0],UNIT[\"metre\",1,AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"9001\"]],AXIS[\"Easting\",EAST],AXIS[\"Northing\",NORTH],AUTHORITY[\"EPSG\",\"26711\"]]")
```

### Writing to GeoTIFF
Create a random `GeoArray` and write it to a GeoTIFF file.

```julia
# Create, reference and write a TIFF
julia> ga = GeoArray(rand(100,200))
julia> bbox!(ga, (min_x=2., min_y=51., max_x=5., max_y=54.))  # roughly the Netherlands
julia> epsg!(ga, 4326)  # in WGS84
julia> GeoArrays.write("test.tif", ga)
```

### Streaming support
The package supports streaming reading.

```julia
# Read in 39774x60559x1 raster (AHN3), but without masking (missing) support
julia> @time ga = GeoArrays.read(fn, masked=false)
  0.001917 seconds (46 allocations: 2.938 KiB)
39774x60559x1 ArchGDAL.RasterDataset{Float32,ArchGDAL.IDataset} with AffineMap([1.0433425614165472e-6 0.0; 0.0 -1.0433425614165472e-6], [0.8932098305563291, 0.11903776654646055]) and CRS PROJCS["Amersfoort / RD New",GEOGCS["Amersfoort",DATUM["Amersfoort",SPHEROID["Bessel 1841",6377397.155,299.1528128,AUTHORITY["EPSG","7004"]],AUTHORITY["EPSG","6289"]],PRIMEM["Greenwich",0,AUTHORITY["EPSG","8901"]],UNIT["degree",0.0174532925199433,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9122"]],AUTHORITY["EPSG","4289"]],PROJECTION["Oblique_Stereographic"],PARAMETER["latitude_of_origin",52.1561605555556],PARAMETER["central_meridian",5.38763888888889],PARAMETER["scale_factor",0.9999079],PARAMETER["false_easting",155000],PARAMETER["false_northing",463000],UNIT["metre",1,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9001"]],AXIS["Easting",EAST],AXIS["Northing",NORTH],AUTHORITY["EPSG","28992"]]
```

### Reading bands
GeoTIFFs can be large, with several bands, one can read.

When working with large rasters, e.g. with satellite images that can be GB in size, it is useful to be able to read only one band (or a selection of them) to `GeoArray`. When using `read`, one can specify the band.

```julia
# Get file
julia> fn = download("https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDALDatasets/blob/master/pyrasterio/RGB.byte.tif?raw=true")

# Read band 2
julia> ga_band = GeoArrays.read(fn, masked=false, band=2)
791x718x1 Array{UInt8, 3} with AffineMap([300.0379266750948 0.0; 0.0 -300.041782729805], [101985.0, 2.826915e6]) and CRS PROJCS["UTM Zone 18, Northern Hemisphere",GEOGCS["Unknown datum based upon the WGS 84 ellipsoid",DATUM["Not_specified_based_on_WGS_84_spheroid",SPHEROID["WGS 84",6378137,298.257223563,AUTHORITY["EPSG","7030"]]],PRIMEM["Greenwich",0],UNIT["degree",0.0174532925199433,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9122"]]],PROJECTION["Transverse_Mercator"],PARAMETER["latitude_of_origin",0],PARAMETER["central_meridian",-75],PARAMETER["scale_factor",0.9996],PARAMETER["false_easting",500000],PARAMETER["false_northing",0],UNIT["metre",1,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9001"]],AXIS["Easting",EAST],AXIS["Northing",NORTH]]
```

In case there is missing data, the type will be a `Union{Missing, T}`. To convert to a GeoArray without `missing`, you can call `coalesce(ga, value_to_replace_missing)`.

### Using coordinates
`GeoArray`s have geographical coordinates for all array elements (pixels). They can be retrieved with the `GeoArrays.coords` function.

```julia
# Find coordinates by index
julia> GeoArrays.coords(geoarray, [1,1])
2-element StaticArrays.SArray{Tuple{2},Float64,1,2}:
 440720.0
      3.75132e6
```

All coordinates (tuples) are obtained when omitting the index parameter.

```julia
# Find all coordinates
julia> GeoArrays.coords(geoarray)
101×101 Array{StaticArrays.SArray{Tuple{2},Float64,1,2},2}:
 [440720.0, 3.75132e6]  [440720.0, 3.75126e6]  [440720.0, 3.7512e6] ...
 ...
```

The operation can be reversed, i.e. row and column index can be computed from coordinates with the `indices` function.

```julia
# Find index by coordinates
julia> indices(geoarray, [440720.0, 3.75132e6])
2-element StaticArrays.SArray{Tuple{2},Int64,1,2}:
 1
 1
```

### Manipulation
Basic `GeoArray` manipulation is implemented, e.g. translation.
```julia
# Translate complete raster by x + 100
julia> trans = Translation(100, 0)
julia> compose!(ga, trans)
```

When GeoArrays have the same dimensions, AffineMap and CRS, addition, subtraction, multiplication and division can be used.

```julia
# Math with GeoArrays (- + * /)
julia> GeoArray(rand(5,5,1)) - GeoArray(rand(5,5,1))
5x5x1 Array{Float64,3} with AffineMap([1.0 0.0; 0.0 1.0], [0.0, 0.0]) and undefined CRS
```

### Nodata filling
GeoArrays with missing data can be filled with the [`fill!`](@ref) function.

```julia
julia> using GeoEstimation  # or any esimation solver from the GeoStats ecosystem
julia> ga = GeoArray(Array{Union{Missing, Float64}}(rand(5, 1)))
julia> ga.A[2,1] = missing
[:, :, 1] =
 0.6760718768442127
  missing
 0.852882193026649
 0.7137410453351622
 0.5949409082233854
julia> GeoArrays.fill!(ga, IDW(:band => (neighbors=3,)))  # band is the hardcoded variable
[:, :, 1] =
 0.6760718768442127
 0.7543298370153771
 0.852882193026649
 0.7137410453351622
 0.5949409082233854
```

### Plotting
Individual bands from a GeoArray can be plotted with the `plot` function. By default the first band is used.

```julia
# Plot a GeoArray
julia> using Plots
julia> fn = download("https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDALDatasets/blob/master/pyrasterio/RGB.byte.tif?raw=true")
julia> ga = GeoArrays.read(fn)
julia> plot(ga)

# or plot a band other than the first one
julia> plot(ga, band=2)
```

![example plot](docs/img/RGB.byte.png)

### Subsetting arrays
GeoArrays can be subset by row, column and band using the array subsetting notation, e.g. `ga[100:200, 200:300, 1:2]`.

```julia
# Get file
julia> fn = download("https://github.com/yeesian/ArchGDALDatasets/blob/master/pyrasterio/RGB.byte.tif?raw=true")

# Read the entire file
julia> ga = GeoArrays.read(fn);

julia> ga.f
AffineMap([300.0379266750948 0.0; 0.0 -300.041782729805], [101985.0, 2.826915e6])

julia> ga_sub = ga[200:500,200:400,begin:end]
301x201x3 Array{Union{Missing, UInt8}, 3} with AffineMap([300.0379266750948 0.0; 0.0 -300.041782729805], [161692.54740834387, 2.767206685236769e6]) and CRS PROJCS["UTM Zone 18, Northern Hemisphere",GEOGCS["Unknown datum based upon the WGS 84 ellipsoid",DATUM["Not_specified_based_on_WGS_84_spheroid",SPHEROID["WGS 84",6378137,298.257223563,AUTHORITY["EPSG","7030"]]],PRIMEM["Greenwich",0],UNIT["degree",0.0174532925199433,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9122"]]],PROJECTION["Transverse_Mercator"],PARAMETER["latitude_of_origin",0],PARAMETER["central_meridian",-75],PARAMETER["scale_factor",0.9996],PARAMETER["false_easting",500000],PARAMETER["false_northing",0],UNIT["metre",1,AUTHORITY["EPSG","9001"]],AXIS["Easting",EAST],AXIS["Northing",NORTH]]

julia> ga_sub.f
AffineMap([300.0379266750948 0.0; 0.0 -300.041782729805], [161692.54740834387, 2.767206685236769e6])

julia> plot(ga_sub)
```
![example plot](docs/img/RGB.byte.subset.png)

### Profile
